# Copyright 2011 Jeffrey Kegler
# This file is part of Marpa::XS.  Marpa::XS is free software: you can
# redistribute it and/or modify it under the terms of the GNU Lesser
# General Public License as published by the Free Software Foundation,
# either version 3 of the License, or (at your option) any later version.
#
# Marpa::XS is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
# but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
# MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU
# Lesser General Public License for more details.
#
# You should have received a copy of the GNU Lesser
# General Public License along with Marpa::XS.  If not, see
# http://www.gnu.org/licenses/.

=head1 NAME

Marpa::XS::Support - Marpa::XS Support, and How to Report Bugs

=head1 DESCRIPTION

Marpa::XS is free software.
There is no warranty.

=head1 BUGS

Please report any bugs or feature requests to
C<bug-marpa-xs at rt.cpan.org>, or through the web interface at
L<http://rt.cpan.org/NoAuth/ReportBug.html?Queue=Marpa::XS>.
I will be notified, and then you'll automatically be notified of progress on
your bug as I make changes.

=head1 SUPPORT

You can find documentation for this module with the perldoc command.

=for Marpa::XS::Display
ignore: 1

    perldoc Marpa::XS

=for Marpa::XS::Display::End
    
You can also look for information at:

=over 4

=item * AnnoCPAN: Annotated CPAN documentation

L<http://annocpan.org/>

=item * CPAN Ratings

L<http://cpanratings.perl.org/d/Marpa-XS>

=item * RT: CPAN's request tracker

L<http://rt.cpan.org/NoAuth/Bugs.html?Dist=Marpa-XS>

=item * Search CPAN

L<http://search.cpan.org/dist/Marpa-XS>

=back

=head1 COPYRIGHT AND LICENSE

=for Marpa::XS::Display
ignore: 1

  Copyright 2011 Jeffrey Kegler
  This file is part of Marpa::XS.  Marpa::XS is free software: you can
  redistribute it and/or modify it under the terms of the GNU Lesser
  General Public License as published by the Free Software Foundation,
  either version 3 of the License, or (at your option) any later version.
  
  Marpa::XS is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
  but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
  MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU
  Lesser General Public License for more details.
  
  You should have received a copy of the GNU Lesser
  General Public License along with Marpa::XS.  If not, see
  http://www.gnu.org/licenses/.

=for Marpa::XS::Display::End

=cut

