# Copyright 2012 Jeffrey Kegler
# This file is part of Marpa::R2.  Marpa::R2 is free software: you can
# redistribute it and/or modify it under the terms of the GNU Lesser
# General Public License as published by the Free Software Foundation,
# either version 3 of the License, or (at your option) any later version.
#
# Marpa::R2 is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
# but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
# MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU
# Lesser General Public License for more details.
#
# You should have received a copy of the GNU Lesser
# General Public License along with Marpa::R2.  If not, see
# http://www.gnu.org/licenses/.

=head1 Name

Marpa::R2::BNF - BNF Interface

=head1 Synopsis

=for Marpa::R2::Display
name: Stuifzand Synopsis
partial: 1
normalize-whitespace: 1

    use Marpa::R2;

    my $grammar = Marpa::R2::Grammar->new(
        {   
            actions        => 'My_Actions',
            default_action => 'do_first_arg',
            source          => \(<<'END_OF_SOURCE'),
    :start ::= Script
    Script ::= Expression+ separator => <op comma> action => do_script
    Expression ::=
        Number
        | (<op lparen>) Expression (<op rparen>) action => do_parens assoc => group
       || Expression (<op pow>) Expression action => do_pow assoc => right
       || Expression (<op times>) Expression action => do_multiply
        | Expression (<op divide>) Expression action => do_divide
       || Expression (<op add>) Expression action => do_add
        | Expression (<op subtract>) Expression action => do_subtract
    END_OF_SOURCE
        }
    );

=for Marpa::R2::Display::End

=head1 Overview

This page is the reference for the Marpa's "BNF interface",
also called its "Stuifzand interface".
The Stuifzand interface allows the grammar to be specified using
a string whose text is written in a variation of BNF.
BNF source strings are specified using the 
L<the C<source> named argument of Marpa::R2's grammars|Marpa::R2::Grammar/"source">.
BNF source strings perform the functions of
the C<rules> and C<start> named arguments of Marpa grammars.
When
the C<source> named argument is used to specify a grammar,
the C<rules> and C<start> named arguments should not be used,
and vice versa.

The Stuifzand interface is
an example of a domain-specific language (DSL).
The DSL of this document can (and has been) used to specify other
DSL's, and therefore can be seen as a "meta-DSL".

=head1 The source string

=head2 Structure

Whitespace separates tokens, but is otherwise ignored.
Comments are equivalent to whitespace.
A hash ("C<#>") character starts a comment,
which continues to the end of the line.

The Stuifzand format consists of rule declarations.
Each rule declaration consists of, in order:

=over 4

=item * A left hand side (LHS).
This will be a
symbol or a pseudo-symbol.

=item * The declaration operator ("C<::=>").

=item * A right hand side (RHS).
For each type of rule,
the RHS will be described in detail below.
In the case of empty rules,
the RHS will be empty.

=item * An adverb list.
Each adverb consists of a keyword,
the adverb operator ("C<< => >>"),
and the adverb's value.
The adverb list may be zero length.

=back

=head2 Symbol names

Symbol names can be either "bare" or enclosed in angle brackets.
Bare symbol names must consist entirely of Perl word characters
(alphanumerics, plus the underscore).
The angle brackets, if used, serve to "quote"
the symbol name,
and will not be part of the symbol name.

If angle brackets are used, symbol names may also contain whitespace,
as in

=for Marpa::R2::Display
ignore: 1

    <op comma>

=for Marpa::R2::Display::End

A whitespace sequence inside angle brackets can
include any whitespace character that is legal in Perl,
including newlines.
This allows very long symbol names to be line wrapped,
if necessary.

Unlike angle brackets, the whitespace does become part of the symbol name,
but it does so in a "normalized" form.
Leading and trailing whitespace in the name is discarded,
and all other whitespace sequences are converted to a single ASCII
space character.
This means that

=for Marpa::R2::Display
ignore: 1

    < op comma  >
    <op   comma>
    <     op comma>

=for Marpa::R2::Display::End

and even


=for Marpa::R2::Display
ignore: 1

    <op
    comma>

=for Marpa::R2::Display::End

will all be regarded as the same symbol name.
The normalized form of that symbol name
is C<< <op comma> >>.
The actual name of a symbol
is the string inside the brackets of its
normalized form.

=head2 Types of rules

Rules are of four kinds:
the start rule,
empty rules,
quantified rules
and prioritized rules.
A rule like the following,

=for Marpa::R2::Display
ignore: 1

    a ::= b c d

=for Marpa::R2::Display::End

whose RHS consists only of a sequence of symbols,
is treated as a
prioritized rule with only one alternative
and only one priority.
In a typical large grammar,
most rules are prioritized rules,
many of them taking
a simple form like that in the display
above.

=head2 Start rule

Every source string should have a start rule.
The LHS of this rule is the C<:start> pseudo-symbol.
The RHS must be a single symbol name.
The start rule does not accept any adverbs.

=head2 Empty rules

An empty rule is a rule with an empty RHS.
An empty right hand side is what the name suggests: no symbols
or punctuation.
An action adverb is allowed in an empty rule,
but no others.
A empty rule makes its LHS symbol a nullable symbol.

=head2 Quantified rules

A rule is quantified if
its RHS consists of a single symbol name,
followed by a "quantifier".
The quantifer is either
a star ("C<*>"),
or a plus sign ("C<+>")
indicating, respectively, that the sequence rule has a minimum length
of 0 or 1.
Quantified rules allow adverbs.

=head2 Prioritized rules

Any rule which is not a start rule,
and not empty or quantified, is considered prioritized.
The prioritization may be simple, consisting only of a
single priority level.

Each prioritized right hand side consists of one or more right hand alternatives
(called "alternatives" for brevity).
An alternative is a series of one or more symbols,
followed by zero or more adverbs.

The alternatives are separated by single or double "or" symbols.
This means the alternatives in a prioritized right hand side proceed
from tightest (highest) priority to loosest.
The double "or" symbol ("C<||>") is the "loosen" operator --
the alternatives after it
have a looser (lower) priority than the alternatives before it.
The single "or" symbol ("C<|>") is the ordinary "alternative" operator --
alternatives on each side of it have the same priority.
Associativity is specified using adverbs, as described below.

Within an alternative, symbols may be enclosed in parentheses.
A symbol enclosed in parentheses is hidden from
L<Marpa's semantics|Marpa::R2::Semantics>.
A set of parentheses may contain more than one symbol,
in which case the entire sequence of symbols is hidden,
as if they had been enclosed in parentheses individually.

=head2 Adverbs

Adverbs are allowed for empty rules, quantifiied rules,
and for the right hand side alternatives in prioritized rules.
Adverbs must occur after the symbols.
Adverbs consist of a keyword, the adverb operator ("C<< => >>"),
and the adverb's value.
The keyword must be one of those described in this section.
The adverb's value must be as described for each keyword.

=head3 action

The value of the C<action> keyword
must be a Perl word (a string of alphanumerics
or underscores).
It will be interpreted as the action name,
as described for
L<the C<action> named argument of rule descriptors|Marpa::R2::Grammar/"action">.

=head3 assoc

The C<assoc> adverb is only valid in a prioritized rule.
Its value must be one of
C<left>,
C<right> or
C<group>.
Its effect will be as described
L<below|/"Precedence">.

=head3 separator

The C<separator> keyword is only valid for a quantified right side,
and its value must be a symbol of the grammar.
It will be used as the separator,
L<as described for sequence rules|Marpa::R2::Grammar/"Sequence rules">.

=head3 proper

The C<proper> keyword is only valid for a quantified right side,
and its value must be a boolean,
in the form of a binary digit (C<0> or C<1>).
It indicates proper or Perl separation,
L<as described for sequence rules|Marpa::R2::Grammar/"Sequence rules">.

=head1 Precedence

Marpa's precedence is a generalization beyond the traditional ideas of precedence.
Traditional precedence parsing required
the classification of operators as postfix, infix, etc.
Marpa's precedence parsing is NOT based on
the special treatment of operators.

For the purpose of precedence,
an operand is an occurrence in a RHS alternative
of the LHS symbol.
An operator is considered to be anything 
that is not an operand.
The arity of an alternative is the number of operands that
it contains.
All arities are allowed, from zero to the arbitrary
number imposed by system limits such as memory and file size.

For example, in the synopsis, the LHS symbol is
C<Expression>.  The alternative

=for Marpa::R2::Display
name: Stuifzand Synopsis
partial: 1
normalize-whitespace: 1

        (<op lparen>) Expression (<op rparen>)

=for Marpa::R2::Display::End

contains one occurrence of C<Expression> and therefore has an arity of one.
The C<< <op lparen> >> and C<< <op rparen> >> are considered operators.

In the RHS alternative

=for Marpa::R2::Display
name: Stuifzand Synopsis
partial: 1
normalize-whitespace: 1

       Expression (<op pow>) Expression

=for Marpa::R2::Display::End

C<Expression> occurs twice, and therefore the arity is 2.
C<< <op pow> >> is considered to be an operator.

Because for this purpose an operator is defined as anything that
is not an operand, some symbols are considered operators
that would not be in the traditional approach.
For example,
in the RHS alternative

=for Marpa::R2::Display
name: Stuifzand Synopsis
partial: 1
normalize-whitespace: 1

       Number

=for Marpa::R2::Display::End

there are no occurrences of C<Expression>, so that the alternative
has an arity of zero -- it is nullary.
The symbol C<Number> is considered to be an operator.

An alternative with arity 0 is nullary.
Precedence and associativity
are meaningless in this
case and will be ignored.

An alternative with arity 1 is unary.
Precedence will have effect,
but left and right associativity will not.

An alternative with arity 2 is binary.
Precedence will have effect,
and left and right associativity will behave
in the traditional way,
The traditional behavior for binary alternatives
is exactly as described next for the I<N>-ary case.

An alternative with an arity of I<N>,
where I<N> is 2 or greater, is I<N>-ary.
Precedence will have effect.
For left associativity,
only the leftmost operand of an I<N>-ary alternative
associates -- operands
after the first will have the
next-tightest priority level.
For right associativity,
only the rightmost operand of an I<N>-ary alternative
associates -- all operands
except the last
will have the next-tightest priority level.

Marpa also allows "group" associativity.
In "group" associativity, all operands associate
at the loosest (lowest) priority.
That is, in an alternative with group associativity,
each operand may be a full expression of the kind
defined by the prioritized rule.
"Group" associativity is used, for example,
in implementing the traditional function of parentheses
in Marpa.
Group associativity is meaningless for nullary alternatives,
and is ignored.

=head1 Caveats

=head2 Symbol names

The BNF interface may rewrite its symbol names internally.
Here we call the name by which a symbol is specified in the
BNF interface string its "external symbol name",
and its name as rewritten, its "internal symbol name".
In many cases, Marpa::R2 makes sure the user sees only
the external names of symbols.
For example,
L<the C<rule()> Grammar method|Marpa::R2::Grammar/"rule()">
returns external symbol names.

However,
for some purposes, such as tracing grammars, the use of
internal names may sometimes
be appropriate.
Marpa::R2's use of external and internal symbol names
is evolving.
When the Stuifzand interface is used,
except as documented in this section,
the user may see either the internal or external form
of a symbol's name.
Also, the exact form of the internal name is
subject to change.

=head2 Precedence: the good news

Marpa's generalization of precedence works
for all grammars that
can be defined by prioritized rules.
It is efficient (linear) for all grammars that could be
parsed by the traditional precedence parsing methods.
Marpa also allows you to define alternatives
not allowed by traditional methods.
Many of these are useful,
and most of the useful ones can be parsed efficiently.

=head2 Precedence and ambiguous grammars

Because of the many forms of recursion allowed,
it is possible
to define highly ambiguous grammars using the precedence mechanism.
This can occur even by accident.

The user should especially be careful with
right hand side alternatives in
which all the symbols are operands.
These can be useful.
For example, an implicit operation can be defined using
an binary alternative with no non-operands,
and this could implement, for example,
the standard notation for concatenation or multiplication.
But to do this efficiently
requires either avoiding ambiguity,
or controlling its use carefully.

Marpa does catch the case where an alternative consists
only of a single operand -- a "unit rule".
This causes a fatal error.
Unit rules are easy to define by accident in
the Stuifzand interface.
The author knows of no practical use for them,
and their presence in a grammar is usually
unintentional.
Note that, in the event an application
does find a use for a grammar with unit rules,
Marpa's standard interface can parse it.

=for Marpa::R2::Display::End
   
=head1 Copyright and License

=for Marpa::R2::Display
ignore: 1

  Copyright 2012 Jeffrey Kegler
  This file is part of Marpa::R2.  Marpa::R2 is free software: you can
  redistribute it and/or modify it under the terms of the GNU Lesser
  General Public License as published by the Free Software Foundation,
  either version 3 of the License, or (at your option) any later version.

  Marpa::R2 is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
  but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
  MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU
  Lesser General Public License for more details.

  You should have received a copy of the GNU Lesser
  General Public License along with Marpa::R2.  If not, see
  http://www.gnu.org/licenses/.

=for Marpa::R2::Display::End

=cut

# Local Variables:
#   mode: cperl
#   cperl-indent-level: 4
#   fill-column: 100
# End:
# vim: expandtab shiftwidth=4:

