# Copyright 2022 Jeffrey Kegler
# This file is part of Marpa::R2.  Marpa::R2 is free software: you can
# redistribute it and/or modify it under the terms of the GNU Lesser
# General Public License as published by the Free Software Foundation,
# either version 3 of the License, or (at your option) any later version.
#
# Marpa::R2 is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
# but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
# MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU
# Lesser General Public License for more details.
#
# You should have received a copy of the GNU Lesser
# General Public License along with Marpa::R2.  If not, see
# http://www.gnu.org/licenses/.

=head1 NAME

Marpa::R2::Support - Support, and how to report bugs

=head1 Description

Marpa::R2 is free software.
There is no warranty.

This page is only updated when there is a new release.
For the lastest information on getting support,
and filing bugs, please consult
the "updates" page, C<UPDATES.md>,
in the current repo.
At this point, the link for the updates page is
L<https://github.com/jeffreykegler/Marpa--R2/blob/master/UPDATES.md>.

Resources available as of this writing include the following:

* The IRC channel is where most discussion takes place.
It is C<#marpa> at
C<irc.libera.chat>.
It is logged at
L<http://colabti.org/irclogger/irclogger_log/marpa>.

* In addition, there is a Google Groups mailing list dedicated to Marpa
It is at L<https://groups.google.com/forum/?fromgroups#!forum/marpa-parser>.

* Bugs should be filed as issues in this repo.
Note that C<Marpa::R2>
is now "stable", and new features are not added to it.
New versions are released only when they benefit users
of the current functionality in a major way.
New versions usually occur only when a serious
bug is discovered.

* Ron Savage maintains a L<Marpa's official starting
page|http://savage.net.au/Marpa.html>.

* The author also maintains a less extensive L<Marpa web
site|https://jeffreykegler.github.io/Marpa-web-site/>.

* You can find documentation for this module with the perldoc command.

=for Marpa::R2::Display
ignore: 1

    perldoc Marpa::R2

=for Marpa::R2::Display::End

=head1 Copyright and License

=for Marpa::R2::Display
ignore: 1

  Copyright 2022 Jeffrey Kegler
  This file is part of Marpa::R2.  Marpa::R2 is free software: you can
  redistribute it and/or modify it under the terms of the GNU Lesser
  General Public License as published by the Free Software Foundation,
  either version 3 of the License, or (at your option) any later version.

  Marpa::R2 is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
  but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
  MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU
  Lesser General Public License for more details.

  You should have received a copy of the GNU Lesser
  General Public License along with Marpa::R2.  If not, see
  http://www.gnu.org/licenses/.

=for Marpa::R2::Display::End

=cut

