# Copyright 2011 Jeffrey Kegler
# This file is part of Marpa::XS.  Marpa::XS is free software: you can
# redistribute it and/or modify it under the terms of the GNU Lesser
# General Public License as published by the Free Software Foundation,
# either version 3 of the License, or (at your option) any later version.
#
# Marpa::XS is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
# but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
# MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU
# Lesser General Public License for more details.
#
# You should have received a copy of the GNU Lesser
# General Public License along with Marpa::XS.  If not, see
# http://www.gnu.org/licenses/.

=head1 NAME

Marpa::PP::Advanced::Algorithm - (OUTDATED) The Marpa Algorithm

=head1 THIS DOCUMENT IS OUTDATED

With Marpa::XS, I made many changes to the algorithm, and
this document is in need of a thorough revision.
It may not, in fact, be kept in its present form.
A lot of the material is very academic, and I plan to move
most of the academics into the libmarpa documentation.

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This document
describes the aspects of
the Marpa algorithm
that break new ground.
It is not a comprehensive description of the Marpa algorithm.
Marpa owes its existence to previous work by
other researchers.
Their work is cited in L<Marpa's bibliography|Marpa::PP::Advanced::Bibliography>.
This document is intended to supplement their writings.

I hope to have
the opportunity to write a full account of
the Marpa algorithm.
Until then,
I hope the reader sees the one-sidedness
of this document
as a temporary necessity,
and not as the product of my ingratitude toward the
researchers without whom my own work would
not have been possible.

When I started writing Marpa I had many expectations.
Marpa has exceeded most of them.
Marpa will be a fast algorithm for almost every practical grammar.
The one respect in which Marpa disappoints me
is its complexity.
As an algorithm, Marpa has its moments of beauty,
but nobody could say it achieves that beauty through simplicity.

Marpa is many different parsing techniques, rolled into one.
The way these interact is one of the beauties
I do see in the algorithm.
Perhaps it was wrong of me to hope Marpa would be a late Picasso,
instead of a Hieronymous Bosch.

=head1 The Sources of the Marpa Algorithm

=over

=item 1970

Jay Earley L<invents the algorithm that now bears his
name|Marpa::PP::Advanced::Bibliography/"Earley 1970">.

=item 1991

Joop Leo L<describes a way to modify Earley's algorithm so that it
runs in O(n) time for all LR-regular
grammars|Marpa::PP::Advanced::Bibliography/"Leo 1991">.
LR-regular is a vast class of grammars, including all the
LR(k) grammars, all grammars parseable with recursive descent,
and regular expressions.
LR-regular can safely be thought of as including all grammars
in practical use today, and then some.

=item 2002

L<Aycock and Horspool describe a way to do LR(0)
precomputation|Marpa::PP::Advanced::Bibliography/"Aycock and Horspool 2002">
for Earley's algorithm.
Their method makes Earley's faster in most
practical situations, but not all.
In particular, right-recursion remains quadratic in
the Aycock and Horspool algorithm.
Worst case is no better than Earley's.
Leo is unaware of Aycock and Horspool's work
and Aycock and Horspool seem unaware of Leo.

=item 2010

... which brings us to Marpa.

=back

=head1 About the Rest of this Document

The rest of this document is fragmented,
highly technical material.
I tried to write these sections for as wide an audience
as possible, but in many cases it simply was not possible
to keep the sections short without
assuming a lot of
familiarity with the literature on Earley parsing.

=head1 Combining Leo 1991 and Aycock-Horspool 2002

The algorithm described in
L<Aycock-Horspool 2002
|Marpa::PP::Advanced::Bibliography/"Aycock and Horspool 2002">
speeds up Earley's algorithm
by combining Earley items.
Each Earley item in Earley's original algorithm
is for a B<dotted rule> --
a pair consisting of
a grammar rule and a position in that rule.
Dotted rules are so called because the convention when writing
them is to designate the distinguished position with a raised dot.
Dotted rules are also called LR(0) items.

Aycock and Horspool combined dotted rules into sets.
Those sets were also states of a finite automaton.
I call this finite automaton, an Aycock-Horspool Finite Automaton (AHFA).
Aycock and Horspool
changed their Earley items to contain information about AHFA states,
instead of about individual dotted rules.
This reduced the number of
Earley items and
improved the speed of Earley's algorithm considerably.

L<Aycock-Horspool 2002
|Marpa::PP::Advanced::Bibliography/"Aycock and Horspool 2002">
had other very practical insights.
For example, I can't imagine how I could have written Marpa had
I not learned how to deal with
nullable symbols and rules from 
L<Aycock-Horspool 2002
|Marpa::PP::Advanced::Bibliography/"Aycock and Horspool 2002">.
But Aycock and Horspool could not
lay claim to any theoretical milestones.
As the theoreticians say,
L<Aycock-Horspool 2002
|Marpa::PP::Advanced::Bibliography/"Aycock and Horspool 2002">
"improved the constants".
Worst case remained the same,
and right-recursion was still quadratic.

Leo's algorithm and the Aycock-Horspool algorithm each offered
major improvements.
Was it possible to get the best of both worlds?
The major obstacle was that the algorithms spoke different dialects:
Earley items in the
Aycock-Horspool algorithm
used AHFA states.
Leo kept his Earley items in the classic form, one dotted rule per Earley item.
To combine the two algorithms, one algorithm would have to learn to
speak the other's dialect.

It was always clear that translating from one algorithm to the other
would be possible.
What was not so clear was whether
this translation could be made
without doing so much
processing that most or all of the benefit of
one algorithm or the other would be lost.
L<Leo 1991
|Marpa::PP::Advanced::Bibliography/"Leo 1991">,
L<Aycock-Horspool 2002
|Marpa::PP::Advanced::Bibliography/"Aycock and Horspool 2002">,
and even Earley's original algorithm
(after the bug fix suggested
L<by Aho & Ullman in
1972|Marpa::PP::Advanced::Bibliography/"Aho and Ullman 1972">)
all do the same job.
For decades now, the only question has been speed.

The main issue was the translation of "Leo completions" -- those
Earley items added during recognition as a result of Leo's logic.
Leo completions had to "play nice" with Marpa's AHFA-based recognition engine,
or all was lost.
Potentially, I might have been required to rewrite the Aycock-Horspool
Finite Automaton.
But the AHFA was the source of the efficiencies delivered
by the Aycock-Horspool algorithm.
Rewrite the AHFA enough and I might as well throw it away.

But I was in luck.
I noticed that,
in the special case of Leo completions,
there seemed to be
a one-to-one correspondence between AHFA states
and the original dotted rules as used by Earley and Leo.
Eventually, I was able to prove this.
Leo completions were always AHFA "singletons" --
exactly one dotted rule.

This was very unexpected.
The Aycock-Horspool algorithm
produced its gains by combining dotted rules into AHFA states,
and was aggressive about it.
Singletons were infrequent.
But when it most mattered, the Leo logic and the AHFA states
spoke the same language.

In almost every other case,
as expected,
the Leo logic and the Aycock-Horspool logic
did not speak the same language.
A lot of details had to be worked out, but none of these
other details
had the potential
to derail the project.
With the proof that Leo completions were always
AHFA singletons, I knew that
L<Leo 1991
|Marpa::PP::Advanced::Bibliography/"Leo 1991">
and
L<Aycock-Horspool
2002|Marpa::PP::Advanced::Bibliography/"Aycock and Horspool 2002">
could be combined
to
get the best of both.

=head1 Marpa's Changes To The Leo Algorithm

L<Leo 1991
|Marpa::PP::Advanced::Bibliography/"Leo 1991">
describes an algorithm for a recognizer.
Marpa modifies Leo's original recognizer algorithm in two
major respects.
First, as mentioned above,
Leo's recognizer algorithm
had to be converted to work
with AHFA states, instead of dotted rules.

Second, Leo's algorithm is lazy about computing Leo
items.
(A B<Leo item> is my term for what
L<Leo 1991
|Marpa::PP::Advanced::Bibliography/"Leo 1991">
calls
"transition items".)
Leo's original algorithm
does not compute the Leo items until they are
actually needed.
I chose eager computation -- computing
the Leo items as soon as each Earley set is complete.

Eager computation of Leo items greatly simplifies the logic
for using the Leo items.
The processing for each Earley set
can assume that
any Leo items of interest in prior Earley sets
already exist.
Another advantage of eager computation
is that
the logic in the recognition phase
never needs to follow
long chains of Leo items.

=head1 Leo Semantics: Indirect and Lazy

Leo's hints about semantic processing,
while brief, were insightful.
The first decision to make with the Leo
semantics was direct versus indirect.
The direct approach does the semantic processing
with the Leo items themselves, without converting them.
This has the advantage that
costs are incurred only for the Leo items that are
actually used by the semantics.
It has the very serious disadvantage of intertwining the Leo logic
with the semantics.
Dealing directly
with Leo items would more than double the complexity
of the logic for Marpa's semantics.
Because of this, Marpa
rejected the direct approach.

L<Leo 1991
|Marpa::PP::Advanced::Bibliography/"Leo 1991">
suggests an indirect approach.
The indirect approach is to expand the Leo completions
into the stacks of Earley items for which Leo completions
are a shorthand.
However,
in a naive implementation,
the indirect approach eliminates
every advantage of using the Leo speedups --
it merely moves processing from the recognizer into the
semantic phase.

Marpa optimizes by using a lazy implementation of the
indirect approach.
Only those Leo completions useful
for the semantics
are expanded.

For a lazy and indirect implementation,
in all cases,
time complexity is the same as with a
direct implementation.
But for some ambiguous grammars,
the space required grows from linear to quadratic with
any indirect approach.
This does not change the worst case time-complexity --
that was already quadratic.
Fortunately, this worst case --
highly ambiguous parses where
all the parse
results are demanded --
is of limited practical interest.

=head1 Improvements to the Aycock-Horspool Recognition Engine

Marpa takes the recognition engine as
described by Aycock and Horspool
and turns it inside out and upside down --
a double inversion.
In the Aycock and Horspool
version of Earley's,
the main loop iterated over each item of an Earley set,
first using that item to scan for tokens,
then using it to add new items to the Earley set
through completion.

Marpa turns the single main loop of the Aycock-Horspool algorithm
into two separate loops over the Earley items.
The first loop completes the current earley set.
The second loop scans for tokens.
The next two sections
describe the advantages of separating completion
and scanning.

=head1 Prediction-Driven Lexing

Prediction-driven lexing involves lookahead,
but it is lookahead of an especially powerful kind.
A very nice property of Earley's algorithm
is that an Earley item exists
in the Earley sets
if and only if
there is, starting with the current location,
some additional input that would
make that Earley item a part
of a successful parse.
Note that this additional input may be zero length,
in which case 
the presence of that Earley item
indicates that the parse
would be complete and successful
if the input ended at that location.

It is easy to tell from the Earley items
which tokens they are expecting.
This means that at every point in the parse,
it is easy to determine,
for every token,
if there is some subsequent input that
would make it part of a successful parse.
Conversely, it is easy to determine which
tokens are fated to be "dead ends".

Intuitively, you might say that
Earley's algorithm always B<knows> exactly
what is going on at any point in the parse.
But previous implementations of the Earley
parse engine did not allow the lexer to take
advantage of this information.
The obstacle lay in the way that the parse
engines worked.

At each Earley set,
Earley parse engines add Earley items either

=over

=item * Directly based on what is seen
in the input.
In the literature this process is called "scanning".
In this discussion I will call it B<direct processing>.

=item * Based on already existing Earley items,
and only indirectly on what is seen the input.
In the literature this process is called "completion".
In this discussion I will call it B<indirect processing>.

=back

The knowledge of which tokens to expect is not available
until the indirect processing is finished.
For predictive lexing to be done,
that knowledge needed to be available when the direct processing began.
Previous Earley's implementations
intermixed direct and indirect processing,
which made predictive lexing impossible.

Indirect processing depends on direct processing,
as well as vice versa.
It might seem that this would make it impossible to
separate the two,
much less complete the indirect processing first.

But direct processing only adds Earley items to B<subsequent>
Earley sets.
And indirect processing only adds Earley items to B<the current>
Earley set.
While indirect processing depends on direct processing
as the parse progresses, for each individual Earley set
the indirect processing is independent of the direct
processing,
and can be done separately and first.

To my knowledge,
the Marpa Earley's implementation is the first
to make this separation.
Marpa's double inversion
of the Aycock-Horspool parse engine
divides the parsing for each Earley set into
two loops.
The first loop does the indirect processing for
an Earley set.
The second loop does the direct processing.

In Marpa,
the indirect processing is complete before the direct
processing starts.
Once indirect processing ends, the parse engine knows
which tokens are possible at the current location.
This knowledge can be made available
to the lexer before any tokens are scanned.
This is what makes prediction-driven lexing possible.

A lexer working with the
Marpa parse engine
can know which tokens are possible
at any point, and which are not.
The lexer can restrict itself to looking for those
tokens which have the potential to produce a
successful parse.
The lexer can avoid wasting its time on the other tokens.

Some current lexers are already
stateful.
But these rely on state generated by their own
regular expression engines.
The Marpa parse engine's knowledge of
expected and unexpected tokens
is far more specific than the knowledge
that even the most sophisticated lexer can
derive from looking at its internal state.

=head1 Ruby Slippers Parsing

I expected that more efficient lexing would be the main
benefit of prediction-driven lexing.
But then I stumbled on the Ruby Slippers Technique,
and realized that prediction-driven lexing is capable of
far more than optimizing the lexer.
I call the technique of this section,
Ruby Slippers Parsing,
after Dorothy's magical shoes 
in the movie I<Wizard of Oz>.
This is because, frankly,
it does seem too good to be true.

To do Ruby Slippers Parsing,
you program the lexer to change,
based on the input "wished for" by the parser,
the list of tokens passed to the parser.
To use the image of the movie,
if the parse engine says that the next thing it wants to do is go to Kansas,
then the next thing that lexer tells the parse engine is that,
yes indeed, the parse engine is in Kansas.

The Ruby Slippers Technique can make difficult problems
stunningly easy.
For example, L<Marpa::HTML> is extremely liberal
in the HTML it accepts,
and therefore had to come up with a way
to deal with the problem
of missing HTML end tags.
Ordinarily, this is done with some very convoluted logic
full of special cases.

Instead,
L<Marpa::HTML> uses the Ruby Slippers.
When the parser in 
L<Marpa::HTML> hits an obstacle, it checks to
see if the parser is looking for an HTML end tag.
If the parser wants an HTML end tag,
the lexer creates an tag
of exactly the type that the parser
wants, on the fly.
Presto, Kansas.
For more about Ruby Slippers Parsing, see
my blog post on the subject:
L<http://blogs.perl.org/users/jeffrey_kegler/2010/06/parsing-with-ruby-slippers.html>.

=head1 Earlemes

Marpa allows ambiguous lexing,
including the recognition of lexemes
of different lengths starting at the
same lexical position,
and the recognition of overlapping lexemes.
To facilitate this,
Marpa introduces the B<earleme> (named after Jay Earley).
Previous Earley 
implementations required the input to be broken
up into tokens,
typically by lexical analysis of the input using
regular expressions.
This in turn forced the input to be unambiguous.
Requiring that the input of a general BNF parser
be unambiguous is hobbling the parser.

Marpa allows the scanning phase of
Earley's algorithm to add items not just to the
next Earley set, but to any later one.
Alternative scans of the input can be put into the Earley sets, and
the power of Earley's algorithm harnessed to deal with the
indeterminism.

Marpa does this by allowing
each scanned token to have a length in earlemes.
The B<earleme> is a unit of distance
measured in Earley sets.
If the length of a scanned token is I<L>,
and the current Earley set is I<C>,
a newly scanned Earley item is added to Earley set I<C+L>.
For example, if a token is 7 earlemes long,
and the token is to start at Earley set 35,
then the token is added to Earley set 42.

Lexing in earlemes is flexible.
If an implementation defines an earleme so that the
distances in earlemes are the same as 
distance in a token stream,
then lexing in earlemes is exactly equivalent
to traditional lexing.
But distance in earlemes could also be defined as equivalent to string length,
measured either in bytes or Unicode graphemes.

=head1 Chomsky-Horspool-Aycock Form

Marpa's internal rewriting
of the grammar
is another significant change
to the Aycock and Horspool algorithm.
Aycock and Horspool rewrote their grammars internally into what they
called NNF (Nihilist Normal Form).
Earley's original
algorithm had serious issues with nullable symbols and productions,
and the NNF rewrite fixes almost all of them.
(As a reminder,
a nullable symbol or production is
one which derives the empty string.)
Importantly,
NNF also allows complete and easy mapping of the semantics of the
original grammar to its NNF rewrite, so that NNF and the whole
rewrite process can be made invisible to the user.

To deal with the splitting of RHS proper nullables into two symbols,
one non-nullable and one nulling,
NNF creats new rules covering all possible RHS combinations
of non-nullable and nulling symbols.
The NNF B<factoring> is exponential in the theoretical worst case,
and I believe it would create efficiency issues in practice as well.
For example,
a language in which whitespace is significant but optional
can easily cause an NNF size explosion.

A result due to Chomsky shows that any grammar can be rewritten
as a grammar with at most two symbols on the right hand side.
Relaxing Chomsky's rewrite to allow right hand sides with any number of symbols,
but at most two proper nullables,
produces a rewrite I call CHAF (Chomsky-Horspool-Aycock Form).

CHAF changes the worst case to linear, and in practical cases lowers
the multiplier.
A problem with NNF is that the rewritten grammar is
exponentially larger than the original in the worst
case.
I think
cases will arise in practice
where the NNF size explosion is a real problem.

The shortened CHAF production maps back
to the original grammar so that like NNF,
the CHAF rewrite can be
made invisible to the user.
With CHAF, the theoretical worst
behavior is linear, and in those difficult cases likely to arise
in practice the multiplier is much smaller.

=head1 Constructing the AHFA

The Aycock-Horspool algorithm requires the grammar to be
converted into what their paper calls a "split E<epsilon>-DFA".
I find the term "split E<epsilon>-DFA" unwieldy,
and prefer to take the opportunity to give credit where it is due.
The sets that Aycock and Horspool call
split E<epsilon>-DFA states,
I call AHFA (Aycock-Horspool Finite Automaton) states.

The description of the
"split E<epsilon>-DFA"
is on pages 624-627 of 
L<Aycock-Horspool
2002|Marpa::PP::Advanced::Bibliography/"Aycock and Horspool 2002">.
This description contained the insights
without which Marpa could not have been written.
But, in my reading at least, the Aycock-Horspool
description was conceptual -- a tool  
for explaining the theory behind the AHFA.
An actual algorithm
to create an AHFA from an arbitrary grammar
needed to be developed as part of the Marpa project.

=head1 Two Problems I did not Have to Solve

This document is devoted to what is new with Marpa.
It is not intended to describe the work of others.
But I hope the reader will forgive the digression
that is this section.
Having the work of others to build on
was essential to the Marpa project,
and I want to illustrate this with two examples.

The Marpa project did B<not> have to figure out how to 
handle nullable symbols.
This is fortunate,
because I am not sure I would have had the insight to
look at the right problem,
never mind find the solution.
But Aycock and Horspool identified this
problem and solved it for me.
All I needed to do was
understand their ideas and implement them.

Similarly, Marpa did B<not> have to figure out how to solve another
long-standing problem with Earley's algorithm -- the inefficiency of
right-recursion.
Joop Leo solved this problem.
As with the problem of nullables,
I am not sure I would have had the perspicuity even
to define the problem of right-recursion correctly,
and I am very happy to have
had it solved for me.

This digression is far from a comprehensive list of what
the Marpa project owes to the work of others.
But I hope these two examples
are useful in putting things in perspective.

=head1 Iterating and Evaluating Parses

The rest of this document will deal with my algorithm
for iterating and evaluating the Marpa parses,
and the concepts I discovered and methods I
developed along the way.
While the problem of efficiently recognizing parses is harder than
the problem of iterating and evaluating them,
more than half of the work in writing Marpa was to develop the algorithm
to iterate and evaluate the parses.

The reason I wound up putting so much effort into iteration and
evaluation lay in Marpa's objective.
From the first, the main objective of the Marpa project was to put
a practical general BNF parsing tool
into the hands of mainstream programmers.
This had never been done.
Clearly, for a general parsing tool to be practical, it needed
a convenient way to evaluate the parse results it recognized.
And, if it claimed (as in fact Marpa does claim)
to handle ambiguous parsing smoothly,
it also needed a good method for iterating parse results.

Among my sources, the degree of focus on the practical varies.
But all of my sources focused far more on the recognition problem
than anything else.
When it came to issues in recognition, my sources went out of their
way to find the hard problems, solve them, and set
forth the main ideas to the reader.
When it came to iterating and evaluating the Earley sets,
my sources were content with hints and guesses.
The guesses proved insightful and the hints wise,
but the actual working out of an algorithm fell to the Marpa project.

My work in developing
Marpa's Evaluator demonstrated persistence more
than it embodied elegance.
I hope the
current implementation looks straightforward,
because my route to it certainly was not.
Marpa's parse iteration and evaluation logic
is in its 3rd Generation.
Two previous Marpa evaluators were developed and repeatedly enhanced,
only to have them reach a point where it was obvious
that further progress demanded that they be completely discarded.
Twice, Marpa's Evaluator
was replaced with a new implementation,
one written almost entirely from scratch.

Aycock and Horspool seem to have understood
the iteration and evaluation
might contain significant unsolved problems.
In
L<their
paper|Marpa::PP::Advanced::Bibliography/"Aycock and Horspool 2002">,
they identify
the search for "better ways
to reconstruct derivations" as an "area of future work."

=head1 Applicable Dotted Rules

A key concept behind Marpa's
3rd Generation Evaluator is that of an B<applicable dotted
rule>.
In the Aycock-Horspool modification of Earley's algorithm,
the Earley items do not directly correspond to dotted rules.
Aycock-Horspool modified the Earley items to contain LR(0) states,
which are sets of dotted rules.
(As a reminder, a dotted rule is another term
for an LR(0) item.)
In order to iterate and evaluate a parse result,
it is necessary to find all the dotted rules which
are applicable to that parse result.
This process is described more fully in
L<the implementation
document|Marpa::PP::Advanced::Implementation/"Applicable Dotted Rules">.

A disadvantage of Aycock-Horspool's use of LR(0) states
in Earley items was that it muddied the question of what it
means for two parses to be "different".
Following the terminology in the textbooks,
let me say that two parse trees are
different if they have different rightmost
derivations.
Next, let me introduce the idea
of a factored parse tree.

In this context, what I mean by factoring is assigning start
and end locations
in the input to each node of the parse tree.
Often, given a parse tree and an input,
only one factoring is possible,
but this is not always the case.
A B<factored parse tree> is a parse tree,
all of whose nodes are factored.
A B<factoring> is a total map, from the nodes 
of the parse tree, to duples
composed of a start location and
an end location.

The use of LR(0) states in the Aycock-Horspool Earley items
meant that
two different sets of the Earley items could
produce the same factored parse tree.
As far as I know I was the first person to encounter this issue --
I've not seen it mentioned in the literature.
This problem did not arise with traditional Earley parsing.
In traditional Earley parsing,
dotted rules have a one-to-one correspondence
with traditional Earley items.

Because Earley items
have an origin and a current location,
each Earley item implies a factoring.
Since in traditional Earley parsing
each Earley item implies a unique factoring
and a unique dotted rule,
each factored parse tree corresponded to a unique
set of traditional Earley items.
In traditional Earley parsing, if two sets of Earley items
were different, 
their factored parse trees had to be different.

The intuitive idea of "two parses being the same"
seems to be equivalent to the identity of
their factored parse trees.
In Marpa's Generation 2 Evaluator,
or-nodes in the parse bocage usually corresponded
to Aycock-Horspool Earley items, and therefore to LR(0) states.
This resulted in the production
of multiple parse results for the
same factored parse tree.
Later versions of the
Generation 2 Evaluator were modified to detect and
prevent these duplicate parses.

With the Generation 3 Marpa Evaluator,
the whole logic of the parse bocage was rethought,
and the entire evaluator rewritten.
In Generation 3, the parse bocage or-nodes
do not necessarily correspond one-on-one
to Earley items.
Instead,
Generation 3 parse bocage or-nodes correspond one-on-one
to dotted rules.

=head1 Previous Work: Parse Forests

Parse forests and their terminology are very
standard in the literature on ambiguous parsing.
But ambiguous parsing gets little or no
coverage in many modern textbooks on parsing,
so that even readers
who have studied parsing
might not know these terms.

A Marpa parse is a set of parse trees,
one for every parse result.
The set of parse trees is trivial if
the parse is unambiguous --
it is a set of trees that contains only one tree.

If the parse is ambiguous,
there is more than one parse tree.
There is
an efficient and compact means of storing a set of closely related
parse trees.
It is called, aptly, a parse forest.
Parse forests have been in the parsing literature for some
time now.
I am unable to discover who discovered the
concept or who coined the term.

Nodes in
a parse forest are divided into and-nodes and or-nodes.
And-nodes are individual pieces of parse trees.
In conventional parse forests,
each and-node represents a production.
And-nodes in a parse forest
are just like all the nodes
in a parse tree
-- they have
the LHS as the parent node and the RHS symbols as child nodes.

Or-nodes represent choices among and-nodes.
Each child of an or-node is one choice.
A parse tree can be generated from a parse forest
by traversing the forest and selecting one child and-node
at every or-node.

=head1 The Parse Bocage

Marpa's representation of parse results is considerably
more complicated than a parse forest,
but it borrows many of the ideas,
and recycles much of the terminology.
Marpa represents parse results in a virtual data structure
called a B<parse bocage>.
I say that the parse bocage
is a virtual data structure,
because no actual Marpa data structure corresponds exactly to the
parse bocage.
Like parse forests,
parse bocages contain and-nodes and or-nodes,
but in the parse bocage
these are created on a just-in-time basis.

The B<parse bocage> differs from a parse forest in several other ways.

=over

=item * The parse bocage is never fully linked internally.
Its structure relies on the iteration stack (described below).

=item * Marpa parses grammars with cycles, so
parse bocages might contain not only trees, but graphs.
This means that, pedantically speaking,
Marpa's parse bocages are based not on parse forests,
but on parse graphs.

=item * In the parse bocage,
and-nodes often do not
represent productions of the grammar directly.
(In a parse forest,
the and-nodes always represent the productions
of the grammar directly.)
In the parse bocage, and-nodes have
at most two children.
The parse bocage often breaks
productions of the original grammar
into pieces, and
it is the pieces
that are represented
in the and-nodes of the bocage.

=back

=head1 Links in the Parse Bocage

The system of links used in Marpa is based on
that devised by
Aycock and Horspool.
In the Aycock-Horspool scheme,
each Earley item has a list of sources.
Each source can have two elements: a predecessor and a cause.

The predecessor is optional.
If present, it is a link to an Earley item.
It's called a "predecessor link" because both the linking and the
linked Earley item are pieces of the same production,
and the linked Earley item is the "predecessor", or earlier part.

The cause element of the source is always present.
It can be a token or a link to a child Earley item.

Because the Earley items contain their sources in the form
of predecessor-cause pairs,
they in effect rewrite the original grammar
into productions
with at most two symbols on the
right hand side.
This is basically Chomsky Normal Form (CNF).

A CNF grammar can be represented
conveniently as a binary tree.
Marpa does not attempt to reconstruct
the original structure of the grammar when
it creates the parse bocage from the Earley items.
Code to traverse, iterate and evaluate binary nodes
is considerably simpler than code which needs to deal
with nodes which have an arbitrary number of children.
Rather than rewrite the grammar into a form that's harder
to process,
it makes sense to leave the grammar the way it is found
in the Earley items.

=head1 The Iteration Stack

A crucial change for Generation 3 of Marpa's Evaluator
was the introduction of the B<iteration nodes>,
and the creation of an B<iteration stack>.
Marpa uses the iteration stack and iteration nodes
to perform the iteration of parse results.

As of Generation 3,
information that changes during iteration
and evaluation is not kept in the parse bocage.
As soon as the recognition phase ends,
Marpa's Generation 3 parse bocage is conceptually
constant.
(In the actual implementation,
the parse bocage
is created and linked
during iteration and evaluation,
as needed and on a just-in-time
basis.)
The content of the parse bocage
is fully determined as soon as the recognition phase ends,
and before the iteration and evaluation of parse results begins.

The B<iteration stack>
is composed of B<iteration nodes>.
An iteration node corresponds to one or-node,
and throughout the iteration node's lifetime
that correspondence remains constant.
In addition,
if the parse is cycle-free,
that correspondence will be
on a one-to-one basis.

At every evaluation point during the iteration,
each iteration node contains a choice of and-node.
Conceptually, Marpa does its evaluation using
a stack of and-nodes,
called
an B<evaluation stack>.
Marpa's evaluation stack
is created from the iteration stack
by transforming every iteration node into the and-node
that is its current choice.

=head1 Parse Bocage: About the Term

The term "bocage" comes from
the bocage forests of Normandy and Brittany.
These man-made forests are
networks of hedgerows,
vegetative tangles 
grown more and more impenetrable
over the centuries.

A bocage hedge is typically part of a working farm,
and its everyday use is
to fence livestock.
But most of the world's farmers find their cows
to be adequately confined
by less imposing obstacles.
The bocage country is the most fought-over section of France,
and over its violent history
the hedgerows have accumulated
a considerable reputation as field fortification.

The first bocage hedgerows may have been cultivated
to stop the armies of the Hundred Years War.
But bocage continued to be formidable
well after the invention of
tanks, artillery and aircraft.
Every account of the Normandy Campaign
of 1944 speaks with respect of
the bocage country.
Most identify the Allied breakout from the hedgerows
as the turning point of that campaign.

=head1 COPYRIGHT AND LICENSE

=for Marpa::XS::Display
ignore: 1

  Copyright 2011 Jeffrey Kegler
  This file is part of Marpa::XS.  Marpa::XS is free software: you can
  redistribute it and/or modify it under the terms of the GNU Lesser
  General Public License as published by the Free Software Foundation,
  either version 3 of the License, or (at your option) any later version.
  
  Marpa::XS is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
  but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
  MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU
  Lesser General Public License for more details.
  
  You should have received a copy of the GNU Lesser
  General Public License along with Marpa::XS.  If not, see
  http://www.gnu.org/licenses/.

=for Marpa::XS::Display::End

=cut

# Local Variables:
#   mode: cperl
#   cperl-indent-level: 4
#   fill-column: 100
# End:
# vim: expandtab shiftwidth=4:
