# Copyright 2014 Jeffrey Kegler
# This file is part of Marpa::R2.  Marpa::R2 is free software: you can
# redistribute it and/or modify it under the terms of the GNU Lesser
# General Public License as published by the Free Software Foundation,
# either version 3 of the License, or (at your option) any later version.
#
# Marpa::R2 is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
# but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
# MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU
# Lesser General Public License for more details.
#
# You should have received a copy of the GNU Lesser
# General Public License along with Marpa::R2.  If not, see
# http://www.gnu.org/licenses/.

=head1 NAME

Marpa::R2::Advanced::Bibliography - A Marpa bibliography

=head1 History of the Marpa algorithm

=over

=item * 1970

Jay Earley L<invents the algorithm that now bears his
name|"Earley 1970">.

=item * 1991

Joop Leo L<describes a way to modify Earley's algorithm so that it
runs in O(n) time for all LR-regular
grammars|"Leo 1991">.
LR-regular is a vast class of grammars, including all the
LR(k) grammars, all grammars parseable with recursive descent,
and regular expressions.
LR-regular can safely be thought of as including all grammars
in practical use today, and then some.

=item * 2002

L<Aycock and Horspool describe a way to do LR(0)
precomputation|"Aycock and Horspool 2002">
for Earley's algorithm.
Their method makes Earley's faster in most
practical situations, but not all.
In particular, right-recursion remains quadratic in
the Aycock and Horspool algorithm.
Worst case is no better than Earley's.
Leo is unaware of Aycock and Horspool's work
and Aycock and Horspool seem unaware of Leo.

=item * 2010

L<Marpa combines the Leo and Aycock-Horspool
algorithms|"Kegler 2013">,
in the process making significant
changes to both of them.
The result preserves the
best features of both.
Marpa also tackles the many remaining
implementation issues.

=back

=head1 Bibliography

=head2 Aho and Ullman 1972

I<The Theory of Parsing, Translation and Compiling, Volume I: Parsing>
by Alfred Aho and Jeffrey Ullman
(Prentice-Hall: Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey, 1972).
I think this was the
standard source for Earley's algorithm for decades.
It certainly was B<my> standard source.
The account of Earley's algorithm is on pages 320-330.

=head2 Aycock and Horspool 2002

Marpa is based on ideas from
John Aycock and R.
Nigel Horspool's "Practical Earley Parsing", I<The Computer Journal>,
Vol. 45, No. 6, 2002, pp. 620-630.
The idea of doing LR(0)
precomputation for
L<Earley's general parsing algorithm|"Earley 1970">,
and Marpa's approach to handling nullable symbols and rules,
both came from this article.

The Aycock and Horspool paper
summarizes Earley's very nicely and is
available on the web: L<http://www.cs.uvic.ca/~nigelh/Publications/PracticalEarleyParsing.pdf>.
Unlike L<"Earley 1970">,
Aycock and Horspool 2002 is B<not> easy reading.
I have been following
this particular topic on and off for years
and nonetheless found this paper very heavy going.

=head2 Dominus 2005

Although my approach to parsing is not influenced
by Mark Jason Dominus's I<Higher Order Perl>,
Mark's treatment of parsing is an excellent introduction to parsing,
especially in a Perl context.
His focus on just about every other technique B<except>
general BNF parsing is pretty much standard, and
will help a beginner understand how unconventional
Marpa's approach is.

Mark's book opened my eyes to many new ideas.
Both Mark's Perl and his English are examples of good writing,
and the book is dense with insights.
Mark's discussion on memoization in Chapter 3 is the
best I've seen.
I wish I'd bought his book earlier in my coding.

Mark's book is available on-line.
You can download chapter-by-chapter or the whole thing at once,
and you can take your pick of his original sources or PDF,
at L<http://hop.perl.plover.com/book/>.
A PDF of the parsing chapter is at L<http://hop.perl.plover.com/book/pdf/08Parsing.pdf>.

=head2 Earley 1970

Of
Jay Earley's papers on his general parsing algorithm,
the most readily available
is "An efficient context-free parsing algorithm",
I<Communications of the Association for Computing Machinery>,
13:2:94-102, 1970.

Ordinarily, I'd not bother pointing out 35-year old nits
in a brilliant and historically important article.
But more than a few people treat this article as not just the first word in Earley
parsing, but the last as well.
Many implementations of Earley's algorithm come, directly and
unaltered, from his paper.
These implementers and their users need to be aware of two issues.

First, the recognition engine itself, as described, has a serious bug.
There's an easy fix, but one that greatly slows down an algorithm
whose main problem, in its original form, was speed.
This issue is well laid out by
Aycock and Horspool
L<in their article|"Aycock and Horspool 2002">.

Second,
according to Tomita there is a mistake in the parse
tree representation.
See page 153 of L<"Grune and Jacobs 1990">,
page 210 of L<"Grune and Jacobs 2008">,
and the bibliography entry for Earley 1970 in L<"Grune and Jacobs 2008">.
In the printed edition of the 2008 bibliography, the entry is on page 578,
and on the web
(L<ftp://ftp.cs.vu.nl/pub/dick/PTAPG_2nd_Edition/CompleteList.pdf>),
it's on pp. 583-584.
My methods for producing parse results
from Earley sets do not come from Earley 1970,
so I am taking Tomita's word on this one.

=head2 Grune and Jacobs 1990

I<Parsing Techniques: A Practical Guide>,
by Dick Grune and
Ceriel Jacobs,
(Ellis Horwood Limited: Chichester, West Sussex, England,
1990).
This book is available on the Web: L<http://dickgrune.com/Books/PTAPG_1st_Edition/>

=head2 Grune and Jacobs 2008

I<Parsing Techniques: A Practical Guide>,
by Dick Grune and
Ceriel Jacobs,
2nd Edition.
(Springer: New York NY, 2008).
This is the most authoritative and comprehensive introduction
to parsing I know of.
In theory it requires no mathematics, only a programming background,
but even so it is moderately difficult reading.

This is L<Grune and Jacobs 1990> updated.
The bibliography for this book is available in enlarged form
on the web: L<ftp://ftp.cs.vu.nl/pub/dick/PTAPG_2nd_Edition/CompleteList.pdf>.

=head2 Kegler 2013

My writeup of the theory behind Marpa,
with proofs of correctness and of my complexity claims
is available online:
L<https://docs.google.com/file/d/0B9_mR_M2zOc4Ni1zSW5IYzk3TGc/edit?usp=sharing>.

=head2 Leo 1991

Marpa's handling of right-recursion uses the ideas in
Joop M.I.M. Leo's
"A General Context-Free Parsing Algorithm Running in Linear
Time on Every LR(k) Grammar Without Using Lookahead",
I<Theoretical Computer Science>,
Vol. 82, No. 1, 1991, pp 165-176.
This is a difficult paper.
It is available online at 
L<http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/030439759190180A>,
click the PDF icon at the top left.

=head2 Wikipedia

Wikipedia's article on Backus-Naur form is
L<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Backus-Naur_form>.
It's a great place to start if you don't know the
basics of grammars and parsing.
As Wikipedia points out,
BNF might better be called Panini-Backus Form.
The grammarian Panini
gave a precise description of Sanskrit
more than 23 centuries earlier in India
using a similar notation.

=head1 Copyright and License

=for Marpa::R2::Display
ignore: 1

  Copyright 2014 Jeffrey Kegler
  This file is part of Marpa::R2.  Marpa::R2 is free software: you can
  redistribute it and/or modify it under the terms of the GNU Lesser
  General Public License as published by the Free Software Foundation,
  either version 3 of the License, or (at your option) any later version.

  Marpa::R2 is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
  but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
  MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU
  Lesser General Public License for more details.

  You should have received a copy of the GNU Lesser
  General Public License along with Marpa::R2.  If not, see
  http://www.gnu.org/licenses/.

=for Marpa::R2::Display::End

=cut

# Local Variables:
#   mode: cperl
#   cperl-indent-level: 4
#   fill-column: 100
# End:
# vim: expandtab shiftwidth=4:
