# Copyright 2014 Jeffrey Kegler
# This file is part of Marpa::R2.  Marpa::R2 is free software: you can
# redistribute it and/or modify it under the terms of the GNU Lesser
# General Public License as published by the Free Software Foundation,
# either version 3 of the License, or (at your option) any later version.
#
# Marpa::R2 is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
# but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
# MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU
# Lesser General Public License for more details.
#
# You should have received a copy of the GNU Lesser
# General Public License along with Marpa::R2.  If not, see
# http://www.gnu.org/licenses/.

=head1 Name

Marpa::R2 To Do -- "To Do" list for Marpa

=head1 About this document

The primary purpose of this document is to act as notes
to myself.
Statements made in this document should in no sense be
taken as commitments.
Items mentioned may be removed, changed, re-ranked, etc., etc.
arbitrarily, suddenly and without notice.

=head1 Items to do

=head2 Add pseudo-symbols: :null, :empty -- sugar for empty RHS alternative

=head2 Add pseudo-symbols: :external, :never -- sugar for [^\d\D]

=head2 Sublexers

Add the ability to switch lexers.

=head1 To think about

=head2 marpa_r_progress_report_reset()

marpa_r_progress_report_reset() was documented, but is no longer used.
I probably should put it into the test suite.

=head1 Dubious

This is a list of ideas with real merit,
but also with issues.
The issues are described for each.
I will not prioritize any item on this list until
I've figured out how to deal with the issue.

=head2 '?' quantifier for SLIF rules

Example

    lhs ::= optional_symbol?

This is a natural addition to the Kleene star ("C<*>")and plus sign ("C<+>").
The issue is that this would be implemented as a rewrite into two rules,
like so:

    lhs ::= optional_symbol
    lhs ::= # empty

If I create the rules internally, there's a problem in describing 
them for tracing and debugging.
This issue does not exist if the user writes the rules himself.
I take the naming issue very seriously, because Marpa's tracing
and debugging ability is one of its important advantages.

=head2 Perl anonymous subroutines as SLIF actions

Allowing Perl anonymous subs
as semantics
would tie the SLIF more heavily to Perl
than I am inclined to at this point.
In particular, I am not sure, whether there should be
a default semantics,
and whether if there is one it
should be Perl or something more targeted.

A disadvantage of allowing Perl code is that problems
(compile-time warnings,
compile-time errors,
run-time warnings,
run-time exceptions
and run-time errors) all must be handled inside Marpa.
This is hard to handle well,
and even when handled well, makes debugging harder for the
application.
It is for this reason that action names are used in Marpa.

=head2 More syntax for RHS subexpressions

There are various suggestions for RHS sub-expressions,
which share a common issue.
There's a hidden tradeoff for cool syntax --
it usually involves grammar rewrites internally.
In the tracing and debugging output,
internal rules
need programmatically-concocted names
for special symbols,
and these are hard to read.
Users find symbol names easier to read if they named
the symbols themselves.

People don't get grammars right the first time,
and I currently think it better to force the application
to spread things over multiple lines.
That way,
when the tracing and debugging reports about a rule,
the programmer knows what that rule is
because the programmer wrote the rules out himself,
long-hand.

I am currently pleasantly surprised at how well Marpa
users cope with the current level of rule rewriting.
Nonetheless, I do not want to push my luck.

=head1 Copyright and License

=for Marpa::R2::Display
ignore: 1

  Copyright 2014 Jeffrey Kegler
  This file is part of Marpa::R2.  Marpa::R2 is free software: you can
  redistribute it and/or modify it under the terms of the GNU Lesser
  General Public License as published by the Free Software Foundation,
  either version 3 of the License, or (at your option) any later version.

  Marpa::R2 is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
  but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
  MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU
  Lesser General Public License for more details.

  You should have received a copy of the GNU Lesser
  General Public License along with Marpa::R2.  If not, see
  http://www.gnu.org/licenses/.

=for Marpa::R2::Display::End

=cut

# vim: expandtab shiftwidth=4:
