\input texinfo @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename slif_internal.info
@include version_i.texi
@settitle Libmarpa @value{VERSION}
@finalout
@c %**end of header

@copying
This manual (@value{UPDATED})
is for the internals of the SLIF @value{VERSION}.

Copyright @copyright{} 2014 Jeffrey Kegler.

@quotation
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the @acronym{GNU} Free Documentation License,
Version 1.3 or any later version published by the Free Software
Foundation.
A copy of the license is included in the section entitled
``@acronym{GNU} Free Documentation License.''
@end quotation
@end copying

@titlepage
@title SLIF internals
@subtitle Version @value{VERSION}
@subtitle @value{UPDATED}
@author Jeffrey Kegler
@c The following two commands
@c start the copyright page.
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying

Published @value{UPDATED} by Jeffrey Kegler
@end titlepage
@c So the toc is printed at the start.
@contents

@ifnottex
@node Top, Copying, (dir), (dir)
@top SLIF internals
@insertcopying
@end ifnottex

@menu
* Copying::                     
* About this document::         
* Internal Interface::          
* GNU Free Documentation License::  

@detailmenu
 --- The Detailed Node Listing ---

Internal Interface

* Symbol internal methods::     
* Rule internals::              
* Grammar internals::           
* Recognizer internals::        
* Bocage internals::            
* Ordering internals::          
* Tree internals::              
* Valuator internals::          

@end detailmenu
@end menu

@node Copying, About this document, Top, Top
@unnumbered GNU LESSER GENERAL PUBLIC LICENSE
@include lgpl-3.0.texi

@node About this document, Internal Interface, Copying, Top
@chapter About this document

This manual is a tool
for is those working on the SLIF internals.
Unless you are thoroughly familiar with Libmarpa and 
the SLIF already,
it is not of interest to you.

@node Internal Interface, GNU Free Documentation License, About this document, Top
@chapter Internal Interface

Internal methods are only for testing and development of libmarpa.
They are listed here (and sometimes described) for the convenience
of those working on libmarpa's internals.

Internal methods are subject to change.
Applications should not use internal methods.
If a description exists and might be helpful,
it may be included below,
but all applications
should treat these methods as ``undocumented''.

@menu
* Symbol internal methods::     
* Rule internals::              
* Grammar internals::           
* Recognizer internals::        
* Bocage internals::            
* Ordering internals::          
* Tree internals::              
* Valuator internals::          
@end menu

@node GNU Free Documentation License,  , Internal Interface, Top
@appendix GNU Free Documentation License

@include fdl-1.3.texi

@bye

@c vim: expandtab shiftwidth=4:
