# Copyright 2011 Jeffrey Kegler
# This file is part of Marpa::XS.  Marpa::XS is free software: you can
# redistribute it and/or modify it under the terms of the GNU Lesser
# General Public License as published by the Free Software Foundation,
# either version 3 of the License, or (at your option) any later version.
#
# Marpa::XS is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
# but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
# MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU
# Lesser General Public License for more details.
#
# You should have received a copy of the GNU Lesser
# General Public License along with Marpa::XS.  If not, see
# http://www.gnu.org/licenses/.

=head1 NAME

Marpa::XS::Semantics::Null - How Marpa Evaluates Null Rules and Symbols

=head1 DESCRIPTION

=head2 Null Values

A B<null node> is a node which derives the zero-length,
or empty string.
This means that a null node
cannot be the ancestor of any token nodes.
In Marpa, null nodes are always leaf nodes.

Null nodes are of two kinds.
A B<nulling symbol node> corresponds to a nulling symbol.
A B<nulled rule node> represents a nulled rule.

For every null node there is a B<null node symbol>,
which is used to the determine
the value of the null node.
For a nulled rule node,
the B<null node symbol> is
the nulled rule's left hand side symbol.
For a nulling symbol node,
the B<null node symbol>
is the nulling symbol.

The value of a null node is the null value
of the null node symbol.
The B<null value of a symbol> comes from
that symbol's C<null_value> property,
if one is defined.
Otherwise, the null value of the symbol
comes from the grammar's
default null value, as defined by the grammar's
L<C<default_null_value>|Marpa::XS::Grammar/default_null_value>
named argument.
If neither the symbol C<null_value> property
or the grammar's
L<C<default_null_value>|Marpa::XS::Grammar/default_null_value>
named argument
is defined,
a symbol's null value is a Perl C<undef>.

=head2 Null Subtrees

A null subtree is a subtree all of whose nodes are null.
Marpa prunes
all null subtrees back to their topmost null node.
This means that all null nodes that remain in
Marpa's virtual parse tree will be leaf nodes.

The "lost" semantics of the non-root nodes
of null subtrees are usually not missed.
Null subtrees cannot contain token nodes,
so no token nodes are lost when
null subtrees are pruned.
As bushy as a null subtree might be,
all of its nodes are null nodes.

All null nodes correspond to zero-length strings,
so we are literally dealing here with
the "semantics of nothing".
In theory the semantics of nothing can be arbitrarily complex.
In practice it should be possible to keep them simple.

If any application ever actually needs it,
Marpa could implement a complex, and even dynamic,
"semantics of nothing".

=head2 Null Sequence Nodes

Rule nodes for sequences were mentioned above.
Sequence nodes can also be null nodes.
This happens with
sequence rules which have a
C<min> rule property of 0.
Such a sequence rule can contain any number of sequence items, including zero items.
When a sequence contains zero items, it must derive the zero-length string,
and its node is a null node.

Sequence null nodes obey the rules for null nodes.
Their value is that of a symbol -- the left hand side
symbol of the nulled sequence rule.

When the node for a nullable sequence rule
is a null node,
its semantics comes from the null value for its left hand side symbol.
When the node for a nullable sequence rule
is not a null node,
then it is a rule node and
its semantics come from the rule.
It's up to the
application to ensure that
the null value of the LHS symbol,
when seen in the same contexts
as the values returned by the semantic Perl closure for the sequence rule,
"makes sense".

If necessary, an application can
make sure that the LHS symbol
of the sequence rule
is not used
for a conflicting purpose elsewhere.
This dedicated symbol can then be given
whatever semantics are necessary.

The rules for nodes in null subtrees apply with equal force
to nodes for sequence rules.
In a nulled subtree, the only node whose semantics matters
is the root node of that subtree.
If a zero-length sequence is in a nulled subtree,
and that zero-length sequence
is not the root node of that subtree,
then its semantics will be completely ignored.

=head1 EXAMPLE

In Marpa, a null node must be leaf node.
Because Marpa prunes every null subtree back to its topmost
null node,
none of the non-root nodes in a null subtree are
represented in Marpa's virtual parse tree.
Here's an example:

=for Marpa::XS::Display
name: Null Value Example
perltidy: '-dcsc -sil=0'

    sub L {
        shift;
        return 'L(' . ( join q{;}, map { $_ // '[ERROR!]' } @_ ) . ')';
    }

    sub R {
        shift;
        return 'R(' . ( join q{;}, map { $_ // '[ERROR!]' } @_ ) . ')';
    }

    sub S {
        shift;
        return 'S(' . ( join q{;}, map { $_ // '[ERROR!]' } @_ ) . ')';
    }

    my $grammar = Marpa::Grammar->new(
        {   start   => 'S',
            actions => 'main',
            rules   => [
                [ 'S', [qw/L R/] ],
                [ 'L', [qw/A B X/] ],
                [ 'L', [] ],
                [ 'R', [qw/A B Y/] ],
                [ 'R', [] ],
                [ 'A', [] ],
                [ 'B', [] ],
                [ 'X', [] ],
                [ 'Y', [] ],
            ],
            symbols        => {
                L => { null_value => 'null L' },
                R => { null_value => 'null R' },
                A => { null_value => 'null A' },
                B => { null_value => 'null B' },
                X => { null_value => 'null X', terminal => 1 },
                Y => { null_value => 'null Y', terminal => 1 },
            },
        }
    );

    $grammar->precompute();

    my $recce = Marpa::Recognizer->new( { grammar => $grammar } );

    $recce->read( 'X', 'x' );

=for Marpa::XS::Display::End

If we write the unpruned parse tree
one node per line in pre-order, depth-first, indenting children
below their parents, we get something like this:

=for Marpa::XS::Display
ignore: 1

        0: Rule Node, Rule: S := L R
             1: Rule Node, Rule L := A B X
                 1.1: Null Node, Symbol A
                 1.2: Null Node, Symbol B
                 1.3: Token Node, Token value is 'x'
             2: Rule Node, Rule R := A B Y
                 2.1: Null Node, Symbol A
                 2.2: Null Node, Symbol B
                 2.3: Null Node, Symbol Y

=for Marpa::XS::Display::End

In this example, six nodes are nulled.
Four of them are in a single subtree: 2, 2.1, 2.2 and 2.3.
Marpa prunes every null subtree back to its null root node, which
in this case
is the node numbered 2.

The pruned tree looks like this

=for Marpa::XS::Display
ignore: 1

        0: Rule Node, Rule: S := L R
             1: Rule Node, Rule L := A B X
                 1.1: Null Node, Symbol A
                 1.2: Null Node, Symbol B
                 1.3: Token Node, Token value is 'x'
             2: Null Node, Symbol R

=for Marpa::XS::Display::End


Here is the output:

=for Marpa::XS::Display
name: Null Value Example Output
normalize-whitespace: 1

    S(L(null A;null B;x);null R)

=for Marpa::XS::Display::End

In the output we see

=over

=item * The null value for node 1.1: "C<null A>".

=item * The null value for node 1.2: "C<null B>".

=item * The token value for node 1.3: "C<x>".

=item * An application of the semantic Perl closure for node 1.

=item * The null value for node 2: "C<null R>".

=item * An application of the semantic Perl closure for rule node 0.

=back

We do not see any output
for nodes 2.1, 2.2, or 2.3 because they were non-root nodes
in the pruned subtree.
We B<do> see the null value for node 2,
because after pruning it is a leaf node.
We B<do not> see an application of the semantic Perl closure for node 2,
because after pruning,
node 2 is not a rule node.

=head1 ADVANCED

In rare cases,
your application
may call for null values with a complex semantics.

=head2 Implementing a Complex but Constant Null Semantics

If an application's semantics of nothing, while complex, remains constant,
you can handle it
by setting every nullable symbol's C<null_value> property
to the value
which your semantics produces when that nullable symbol is the root
symbol of a null subtree.

=head2 Implementing a Complex and Dynamic Null Semantics

If the values of an application's
null values are not constants,
Marpa can still calculate them.
Here is the most general method:

=over

=item *

Determine which of the application's nullable symbols have a dynamic semantics.
Call these the B<dynamic nullables>.

=item *
Let the C<null_value> property of every dynamic nullable be a hash key.

=item *
For every rule with a dynamic nullable on its right hand side,
write the rule's semantic Perl closure
so that it looks up that hash key
in a hash whose values are Perl closures.

=item *
The Perl closure can then use an arbitrarily complex semantics for
calculating the value of the dynamic nullable.

=back

=head1 COPYRIGHT AND LICENSE

=for Marpa::XS::Display
ignore: 1

  Copyright 2011 Jeffrey Kegler
  This file is part of Marpa::XS.  Marpa::XS is free software: you can
  redistribute it and/or modify it under the terms of the GNU Lesser
  General Public License as published by the Free Software Foundation,
  either version 3 of the License, or (at your option) any later version.
  
  Marpa::XS is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
  but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
  MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU
  Lesser General Public License for more details.
  
  You should have received a copy of the GNU Lesser
  General Public License along with Marpa::XS.  If not, see
  http://www.gnu.org/licenses/.

=for Marpa::XS::Display::End

=cut

# Local Variables:
#   mode: cperl
#   cperl-indent-level: 4
#   fill-column: 100
# End:
# vim: expandtab shiftwidth=4:
