=head1 NAME

Marpa::HTML::Parsing_HTML - A Strategy for "Natural" HTML Parsing

=head1 EPIGRAPH

    And now I see with eye serene
    The very pulse of the machine
      -- Wordsworth

=head1 SUMMARY

High-level parsing of
HTML means determining an HTML
document's overall structure.
This has been considered
a difficult problem in the past,
especially for invalid and broken
HTML.
This document outlines a straightforward,
natural and transparent method for parsing
arbitrary documents according to the Dao
of HTML.

=head1 THE BASIC IDEA

L<Marpa::HTML> combines two major components:
a Wishful Thinking Parser and a Ruby Slippers Tokenizer.

The Wishful Thinking Parser ("Wishful Parser" for short)
uses L<a grammar|/"APPENDIX: THE GRAMMAR">
that assumes its input is a language
like HTML, but nicer.
In particular, it assumes that its input is not real
HTML, but a "virtual HTML" where all elements
have start and end tags.

The Ruby Slippers Tokenizer ("Ruby Slippers" for short)
is in charge of prettying up the input so that
the Wishful Parser sees the kind of world it wants to see.
This turns out to be easy to do for valid HTML,
and not hard for invalid and/or broken HTML.

The parse that the Wishful Parser produces is
of a cleaned-up virtual HTML document, not the real one.
But the parse of the virtual document easily maps
back to a parse of the physical document.

=head1 THE WISHFUL PARSER

The Wishful Parser is not a weak parser.
It is a general BNF parser, based on a new algorithm
derived from Earley's.
It is powerful enough that it could deal with the
missing start and end tags on its own.

But L<Marpa::HTML> takes a different approach.
Instead of tying the high-level parser up with details,
it passes these decisions down to the tokenizer,
so that the high-level, parser can focus on the big
picture.
L<Marpa::HTML> uses this approach to let each
of the two components handle what they do best.

The L<Marpa> parse engine,
on which L<Marpa::HTML> is based,
allows predictive lexing.
Predictive lexing is an essential part of the
strategy for parsing HTML described in this document.
In predictive lexing the high-level parser tells
the low-level parser (or tokenizer) what tokens it
needs in order for the parse to proceed.

=head1 THE RUBY SLIPPERS TOKENIZER

This strategy, of trying to isolate the process of parsing
HTML into nitty low-level details, on one hand,
and the big picture on the other,
turns out to be eminently practical.
A Ruby Slippers Tokenizer is not at all hard to write.
L<Marpa::HTML> uses L<HTML::PullParser> to handle most
of the low-level details.
A thin layer of logic is wrapped around
L<HTML::PullParser> 
to implement the wish-granting abilities of the Ruby Slippers.

=head1 HOW THE RUBY SLIPPERS WORK

For simplicity, let's consider the case of HTML valid
according to one of the standards first.
What the Ruby Slippers needs to do for
each token it sees in the physical document is
the following:

=head2 Step 1: Get The List of Acceptable Tokens

Since the Wishful Thinking Parser is predictive,
it knows at any point what tokens will allow the parse
to continue.
The Ruby Slippers gets this list.

=head2 Step 2: Compare the Physical Token

Is the physical token that the Ruby Slippers
one of the tokens that the Wishful
Thinking Parser is looking for?
If so, great.  The Ruby Slippers
just hand the physical
token over, as is, to the Wishful Parser.
Otherwise, the Ruby Slippers proceed to Step 3.

=head2 Step 3: Which of the Acceptable Tokens are Optional Tokens?

What if
the physical token is not one of the tokens acceptable
to the Wishful Parser?
In that case, the Ruby Slippers examines the list
of tokens the Wishful Parser does find acceptable
at this point in the parse.
The Ruby Slippers looks among
tokens acceptable to the Wishful Parser
for tokens which are allowed
to be optional in the physical document.
Optional tokens are always start or end tokens.

=head2 Step 4: Create a Virtual Token

The Ruby Slippers
pick one of the optional tokens that are acceptable to the Wishful
Parse at this point in the parse.
The Ruby Slippers invent a virtual token of that type, and hand
it over to the Wishful Parser.

For HTML valid according to the standards, this step is
surprisingly easy.
There is always one and only one token which is both
optional and acceptable to the Wishful Parser.
No decision has to be made.

=head1 THAT'S IT

What I have described to this point
is sufficient to parse valid HTML.
Parsing broken and invalid HTML is a bit more
complicated.
Even those additional details
are straightforward and intuitive.
The test of this document is about those details.

=head1 EVERYTHING LOOKS LIKE HTML

L<Marpa::HTML> does not require its input document be
valid according to the HTML standards.
Far from it.
For L<Marpa::HTML> every document is a valid HTML documents.
L<Marpa::HTML> accepts that a document might be invalid or
broken, but
L<Marpa::HTML>
assumes that there is an HTML structure in there somewhere,
and does its best to find it.

For documents which conform to one of the HTML specifications,
L<Marpa::HTML> finds the structure according to the standard.
For documents which are not strictly conformant,
L<Marpa::HTML> tries to find a structure that follows the
intention of the author, and the practices of liberal parsers
of HTML, such as the typical rendering engines.

Even a random non-HTML document
will be parsed.
Typically, most of a random document will be
treated as body text,
with L<Marpa::HTML> trying to make sense of
anything in the document that looks like markup.

=head1 OPTIONAL START AND END TAGS

What determines whether a start or end tag is optional?
Some end tokens, and a few start tokens,
are optional because the standards say they
can be.
The practice of liberal parsers in current
is to allow other start and end tags to be
optional.

L<Marpa::HTML> is completely liberal
in what it accepts.
Since in broken HTML any end tag could be
missing, 
L<Marpa::HTML> is be prepared as a last resort
to supply a virtual replacement for any end tag.
This means that for
L<Marpa::HTML> all end tags are in effect optional.

=head2 CONFLICTS: PRIORITIZING TOKENS

The mechanism for dealing with conflicts is a prioritization scheme,
and a handful of special cases.
While this does "fuzz up" the original beauty of the Wishful Thinking
scheme, the priorities and special cases following naturally from
the structure of HTML,
and the logic behind them is intuitive.

The relative priority of the virtual terminals is as follows:

    </html>
    </body>
    <table>
    </head>
    </table>
    </tbody>
    </tr>
    </td>
    <td>
    <tr>
    <tbody>
    <head>
    <body>
    <html>

With one exception, the order is first start tags, from outermost to innermost;
then end tags from innermost to outermost.
These three principles govern:

=over 4

=item * Start an element in preference to ending one 

=item * Start outer, higher level elements before inner, lower level ones.

=item * Start inner, lower level elements before outer, higher level ones.

=back

All this is natural enough.  The one exception is C<< <table> >> which is given
and low a priority as possible.  The DTD's allow table to be started anywhere,
including inside other tables.  Virtual table start tags,
which start tables without the markup explicitly indicating
they should start, threaten anarchy.

L<Marpa::HTML> deals with virtual C<< <table> >> tags by only applying them
when there is no other choice.  Part of the guarantee these is to put 
virtual C<< <table> >> tags as low as possible in the priority scheme.
C<< <table> >> tags are also one of the special cases.

=head2 CONFLICTS: SPECIAL CASES

In addition to giving virtual
C<< <table> >> tags a very low priority, they also 
are not allowed except directly before markup which can only
appear inside tables.
That is, if in a block flow outside a table, L<Marpa::HTML>
encounters a C<< <td> >> tag, the parse cannot continue unless
a table is created.
In this case a virtual
C<< <table> >> tag is allowed.
If the next token is something that can appear outside a table,
such as a C<< <p> >> tag, a virtual table start tag will B<not>
be supplied.

Another special case governs virtual table row start tags ("C<< <tr> >>").
These are not valid according to the DTD's, but to pass the B<HTML::Tree> test
suite they are required.
However, they are not allowed as a way of dealing with an unexpected
start tag for a higher level table construct, such as
C<< <tbody> >>,
C<< <thead> >> or
C<< <tfoot> >>.
Usually the preference to start something rather than to end
something, but when these tags are encountered, starting a virtual
table row leads to an infinite loop.
Special case logic, therefore, prevents the virtual starts of table
rows under these circumstances.

A final special case deals with starting virtual table elements before certain end tags,
as well as before end of file.
All such cases arise in files where the HTML is not valid according to the DTD,
but L<Marpa::HTML> keeping with its policy of liberalism, tries to produce valid
parses when supplying missing tags will do that.
Ordinarily, virtual start tags are preferred to virtual end tags.
However starting a table row, cell or body (
C<< <tr> >>,
C<< <td> >> or
C<< <tbody> >>
)
directly before end of file,
C<< </th> >>,
C<< </td> >>,
C<< </tr> >>,
C<< </thead> >>,
C<< </tbody> >>,
C<< </table> >>,
C<< </body> >> and
C<< </html> >> will cause an
infinite loop and,
as a special case, is prevented.

=head1 DETAILS (notes)

=head2 Virtual Tokens

When stumped, the lexer has two choices, add a virtual token,
or add cruft.

Any end token can be a virtual token.
In addition, optional start tags can be virtual tokens.
The HTML DTD specifies four of these:

    <html>
    <head>
    <body>
    <tbody>

L<HTML::Tree> also treats these table start tags as optional.

    <table>
    <tr>
    <td>

This is wrong according to the DTD, and unsupported by Mozilla,
but I decided that it was important for L<Marpa::HTML> to pass
the same tests as L<HTML::Tree>, so these three start tags
are also virtual terminals.

One problem you might see in simply indulging the fantasies of the Wishful
Thinking Grammar: Don't you run the risk of prematurely ending elements?
The answer in almost all cases is no.
Normally, in cases where you want the parsing of an element to continue,
the token you have is one of the ones that Wishful Thinking Grammar expects.
And an expected token always takes priority over "wishful", or virtual, tokens.

=head2 Conflicting Wishes

In fact, if we stick to the DTD and ignore the L<HTML::Tree> loosenings of
the DTD, there is only one case of a conflict between "wishes".  In tables,
there could be a choice between ending the table and starting the table body:
between a virtual C<< <tbody> >> and a virtual C<< </table> >>.

What is wanted is to start the table body in preference to ending the table,
that is to give a virtual C<< <tbody> >> priority over a virtual C<< </table> >>.
This could have been special cased.
But

=over 4

=item *
Conformity with the loosened table parsing of L<HTML::Tree>
introduced several other conflicts.

=item *
It seemed desirable to allow for HTML someday to be configurable.

=item *
L<Marpa::HTML> is intended to encourage others to "borrow" its logic,
extend it and change it.  Robustness in the face of change is A Good Thing.

=back

For these reasons
I implemented
a more general mechanism for the dealing with conflicts.
It is not complicated, but for dealing with the single
conflict created by original DTD's, it is very much overkill.

=head1 THE MARPA PARSE ENGINE

    Rewrite?  Delete?

Marpa is derived from
the parser
L<described by John Aycock and R.  Nigel Horspool|Marpa::Bibliography/"Aycock and Horspool 2002">.
Aycock and Horspool combined LR(0)
precomputation
with the general parsing algorithm
L<described by Jay
Earley in 1970|Marpa::Bibliography/"Earley 1970">.

=head1 APPENDIX: THE GRAMMAR

    Also, Productions created on the fly.

This grammar is taken directly from the code.
The HTML grammar is created directly from this.
The format is one production per line, with a C<::=> symbol to separate the
left hand side symbol from the right hand side symbols.
A final star indicates a sequence of zero or more of the symbol.
(Sequences are directly supported by L<Marpa>,
which optimizes for them.)

=for Marpa::Display
name: HTML BNF
normalize-whitespace: 1

    cruft ::= CRUFT
    comment ::= C
    pi ::= PI
    decl ::= D
    pcdata ::= PCDATA
    cdata ::= CDATA
    whitespace ::= WHITESPACE
    SGML_item ::= comment
    SGML_item ::= pi
    SGML_item ::= decl
    SGML_flow_item ::= SGML_item
    SGML_flow_item ::= whitespace
    SGML_flow_item ::= cruft
    SGML_flow ::= SGML_flow_item*
    document ::= prolog ELE_html trailer EOF
    prolog ::= SGML_flow
    trailer ::= SGML_flow
    ELE_html ::= S_html Contents_html E_html
    Contents_html ::= SGML_flow ELE_head SGML_flow ELE_body SGML_flow
    ELE_head ::= S_head Contents_head E_head
    Contents_head ::= head_item*
    ELE_body ::= S_body flow E_body
    ELE_table ::= S_table table_flow E_table
    ELE_tbody ::= S_tbody table_section_flow E_tbody
    ELE_tr ::= S_tr table_row_flow E_tr
    ELE_td ::= S_td flow E_td
    flow ::= flow_item*
    flow_item ::= cruft
    flow_item ::= SGML_item
    flow_item ::= ELE_table
    flow_item ::= list_item_element
    flow_item ::= header_element
    flow_item ::= block_element
    flow_item ::= inline_element
    flow_item ::= whitespace
    flow_item ::= cdata
    flow_item ::= pcdata
    head_item ::= header_element
    head_item ::= cruft
    head_item ::= whitespace
    head_item ::= SGML_item
    inline_flow ::= inline_flow_item*
    inline_flow_item ::= pcdata_flow_item
    inline_flow_item ::= inline_element
    pcdata_flow ::= pcdata_flow_item*
    pcdata_flow_item ::= cdata
    pcdata_flow_item ::= pcdata
    pcdata_flow_item ::= cruft
    pcdata_flow_item ::= whitespace
    pcdata_flow_item ::= SGML_item
    Contents_select ::= select_flow_item*
    select_flow_item ::= ELE_optgroup
    select_flow_item ::= ELE_option
    select_flow_item ::= SGML_flow_item
    Contents_optgroup ::= optgroup_flow_item*
    optgroup_flow_item ::= ELE_option
    optgroup_flow_item ::= SGML_flow_item
    list_item_flow ::= list_item_flow_item*
    list_item_flow_item ::= cruft
    list_item_flow_item ::= SGML_item
    list_item_flow_item ::= header_element
    list_item_flow_item ::= block_element
    list_item_flow_item ::= inline_element
    list_item_flow_item ::= whitespace
    list_item_flow_item ::= cdata
    list_item_flow_item ::= pcdata
    Contents_colgroup ::= colgroup_flow_item*
    colgroup_flow_item ::= ELE_col
    colgroup_flow_item ::= SGML_flow_item
    table_row_flow ::= table_row_flow_item*
    table_row_flow_item ::= ELE_th
    table_row_flow_item ::= ELE_td
    table_row_flow_item ::= SGML_flow_item
    table_section_flow ::= table_section_flow_item*
    table_section_flow_item ::= table_row_element
    table_section_flow_item ::= SGML_flow_item
    table_row_element ::= ELE_tr
    table_flow ::= table_flow_item*
    table_flow_item ::= ELE_colgroup
    table_flow_item ::= ELE_thead
    table_flow_item ::= ELE_tfoot
    table_flow_item ::= ELE_tbody
    table_flow_item ::= ELE_caption
    table_flow_item ::= ELE_col
    table_flow_item ::= SGML_flow_item
    empty ::=

=for Marpa::Display::End

=head1 SUPPORT

See the L<support section|Marpa/SUPPORT> in the main module.

=head1 AUTHOR

Jeffrey Kegler

=head1 LICENSE AND COPYRIGHT

Copyright 2007-2010 Jeffrey Kegler.

This program is free software; you can redistribute
it and/or modify it under the same terms as Perl 5.10.0.

=cut

# Local Variables:
#   mode: cperl
#   cperl-indent-level: 4
#   fill-column: 100
# End:
# vim: expandtab shiftwidth=4:
